Add Arthur's DevBlog on moving alteryx workflows to dbt (#3255)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2023-04-24-framework-refactor-alteryx-dbt.md

---
title: "How we reduced a 6-hour runtime in Alteryx to 9 minutes in dbt"
description: Learn how the folks at Indicium Tech leveraged the modularity and visibility features of dbt to reduce a 6-hour runtime in Alteryx to only 9 minutes by implementing a refactoring workflow.
authors: [arthur_marcon, lucas_bergodias, christian_vanbellen]
slug: framework-refactor-alteryx-dbt
tags: [analytics craft]
hide_table_of_contents: false
date: 2023-04-25
is_featured: true
---

Alteryx is a visual data transformation platform with a user-friendly interface and drag-and-drop tools. Nonetheless, Alteryx may have difficulties to cope with the complexity increase within an organization’s data pipeline, and it can become a suboptimal tool when companies start dealing with large and complex data transformations. In such cases, moving to dbt can be a natural step, since dbt is designed to manage complex data transformation pipelines in a scalable, efficient, and more explicit manner. In this article, we describe the differences between Alteryx and dbt, and how we reduced a client's 6-hour runtime in Alteryx to 9 minutes in dbt jobs at Indicium Tech.

<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

> Transforming data to follow business rules can be a complex task, especially with the increasing amount of data collected by companies. To reduce such complexity, data transformation solutions designed as drag and drop tools can be seen as more intuitive, since analysts can visualize the steps taken to transform data. One example of a popular drag and drop transformation tool is Alteryx which allows business analysts to transform data by dragging and dropping operators in a canvas. The graphic interface of Alteryx Designer is presented in **Figure 1**.

Reviewer: Just a tiny sugg for consistency:
```suggestion
Transforming data to follow business rules can be a complex task, especially with the increasing amount of data collected by companies. To reduce such complexity, data transformation solutions designed as drag-and-drop tools can be seen as more intuitive, since analysts can visualize the steps taken to transform data. One example of a popular drag-and-drop transformation tool is Alteryx which allows business analysts to transform data by dragging and dropping operators in a canvas. The graphic interface of Alteryx Designer is presented in **Figure 1**.
```

**This article reports our experience migrating a large client's data workflow from Alteryx to dbt over the course of three months. After model refactoring, model runtime was reduced from 6 hours to 9 minutes in dbt, with clearer lineage of models and better documentation and version control.**

To that end, we:

- Defined which models would be prioritized together with the client's team,
- Defined which approach would be used to refactor Alteryx workflows to dbt models,
- Audited refactored models to make sure they matched the outputs from the original Alteryx workflow, and
- Replaced clients' data sources to the dbt refactored models.

We hope that our experience can be useful for analytics engineers who are looking for a high-level framework to help in the transition from Alteryx workflows to dbt, and that it can help them to see the bigger picture in model refactoring.

## Who isn't this post for?

> While we feel that dbt is a better transformation tool than Alteryx for most use cases, we acknowledge that a migration from Alteryx to dbt isn’t appropriate for everyone. Alteryx is designed for data analysts, but its capabilities are well-suited for business users, including marketing, sales, accounting, and HR. Alteryx may be a good enough tool for you if:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we feel that dbt is a better transformation tool than Alteryx for most use cases, we acknowledge that a migration from Alteryx to dbt isn’t appropriate for everyone. Alteryx is designed for data analysts, but its capabilities are well-suited for business users, including marketing, sales, accounting, and HR. Alteryx may be a good enough tool when:
```

- You have a small number of transformations
- The transformations are relatively simple
- Transformations don't need to run frequently
- You want non-technical users to manage this process

Focusing more on data pipeline visibility and a friendlier user experience, Alteryx excels while working with smaller, more understandable data flows, where the Analytics Engineer (AE) can really visualize how the data is being transformed from the source all the way downstream to each output.

When it comes to handling complex data structures, dbt has several features that make it superior to Alteryx. As we will see ahead with more details, in a data stack transition context, when long and complex data flows are common, dbt is often faster than Alteryx. That happens for a few reasons (**Table 2**):

> | Aspect | dbt | Alteryx |

Reviewer: @KiraFuruichi Are they comparing dbt Cloud or dbt Core? We might want to add that dbt Cloud has a Graphical User interface.

Author: hmmm I'm actually not 100% sure (I'm assuming Cloud), but can confirm with them. I also don't know if we ever classify aspects of dbt Cloud as a GUI (I consider GUIs more of a drag-and-drop sort of vibe), whereas dbt Cloud has the IDE and the job scheduler (which is also not drag-and-drop), but I could be wrong.

Author: So he's talking about both core and cloud here, which makes sense, so I think a solution here is changing the row from `Interface` to `Development experience`?

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-04-24-framework-refactor-alteryx-dbt/Figure6.png" title="Figure 6 - Audit_helper data validation logic" />

#### Step 4: Duplicate reports and connect them to the dbt refactored models

With the models refactored and audited, it is time to plug them in the BI report tool. Although some will be brave enough to plug the refactored model directly into the original BI report, we recommend duplicating the BI report and connecting this replica to the newly refactored dbt model.

This approach allows you to compare the two reports side by side and check how data behaves in the visualizations created. Also, it can function as a step to double check that values match in refactored and legacy tables. Therefore, at times, it may be necessary to go back to the transformation step and cast column types or change a business rule, for example.

## The gains of the refactoring process

> Successfully converting an entire set of data workflows from the Alteryx engine to dbt is surely not a trivial task, but the implementation of this framework, as a result of a trial and error learning process from the team, allowed us to accelerate this process, while its data auditing focus enabled delivering data with visible and automated quality assurance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Successfully converting an entire set of data workflows from the Alteryx engine to dbt is surely not a trivial task, but the implementation of this framework, as a result of a trial-and-error learning process from the team, allowed us to accelerate this process, while its data auditing focus enabled delivering data with visible and automated quality assurance.
```

The conversion proved to be of great value to the client due to three main aspects of the new dbt-based data stack, which were observed by both teams:

- Incredibly shortened run time: Perhaps the most impressive result obtained, the total run time of the marketing team’s data workflow was reduced from more than **6 hours** to just **9 minutes**. This represents a **run time reduction of more than** **40x**. Much of this comes from dbt’s agile SQL compilation and the sequential lineage based execution (see Figure 7).

> - Improved workflow visibility: dbt’s support for documentation and testing, associated with the dbt Cloud interface, allows for great visibility of the workflow’s lineage execution, accelerating errors and data inconsistencies identification and troubleshooting. More than once, our team was able to identify the impact of one column’s logic alteration in downstream models much earlier than these Alteryx models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improved workflow visibility: dbt’s support for documentation and testing, associated with dbt Cloud, allows for great visibility of the workflow’s lineage execution, accelerating errors and data inconsistencies identification and troubleshooting. More than once, our team was able to identify the impact of one column’s logic alteration in downstream models much earlier than these Alteryx models.
```
